+++
title = "Western Australia"
+++


{% featured() %}
<div class="mapContainer">
<iframe class="map" src="https://www.google.com/maps/d/embed?mid=zpIWQxRgYrSw.kFqOL5tGUshk&hl=en&ll=-27.40103,122.31079&z=6" width="640" height="480"></iframe>
</div>

**Great Victoria Desert Study Areas**

{% end %}

{% caption_img(path="Oz_sitesSmall.jpg", width=450, class="floatRight textBox") %}
Positions of my 10 study sites in the Great Victoria Desert (stippled)
{% end %}

The Great Victoria Desert of Australia is also predominantly sandy with red
sands, and supports a vegetation consisting mainly of so-called "spinifex" or
"porcupine" grasses (genus _Triodia_) plus various species of gum trees
(_Eucalyptus_). In wetter places and on harder soils, tracts of "mulga"
(_Acacia aneura_) occur. Occasional dry lakebeds are inhabited largely by
various shrubby chenopod species (including _Atriplex lindleyi_). Stabilized
long red sandridges, parallel to prevailing winds and generally very much like
those in the Kalahari, are scattered throughout the Great Victoria Desert,
particularly in the eastern interior. Extensive areas of sandplain occur as
well. The region is very heterogeneous and mixed habitats of shrubs, _Triodia,
Acacia, Grevillea, Hakea_, and _Eucalyptus_ occur on desert loams and sandy
soils. Study sites A and M are on such ecotonal mixed areas.

{% featured_img(path="Redsands.jpg", width=800) %}
Red Sands study area. Sandplain with spinifex grass tussocks in foreground.
Sandridge in background. 55 lizard species occur at this site (photo by S. E.
Goodyear 2008).
{% end %}


"Red Sands" (area R) and area E are sandridge sites with marble gum trees
(_Eucalyptus gongylocarpa_), a few desert bloodwood trees (_Eucalyptus sp._),
extensive spinifex (_Triodia_), and a variety of sandridge perennials (_Acacia,
Grevillea_, and _Hakea_). On area D, a few scattered smaller sandridges and
sand dunes support a lower and more open vegetation with fewer trees. Sandplain
habitats also occur on these three study sites between sandridges. Two other
areas, G and L, consist solely of such flat or gently rolling sandplains, with
large marble gum eucalypt trees, spinifex and some scattered bushes. Areas B
and N are "pure" spinifex flats (treeless grass desert), whereas area Y is a
relatively pure (nearly treeless) shrub desert site in a dry lakebed. The last
site was chosen because the structure of its vegetation was comparable to that
of North American Great Basin Desert areas as well as that of Kalahari area G.
Comparisons of numbers of lizard species present on these structurally similar
chenopod shrub sites from 3 continental-desert lizard systems reveals 4-6
species in North America, 13 species in southern Africa, and 18 species in
Australia.

Several expeditions were undertaken to the Western Australian deserts, the
first in 1966-68 when eight areas were selected for study (see [66-67
Australian Censuses](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/66-67_Censuses.tif)
and [Pianka 1969](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/HabSpec.pdf)), and the
second in 1978-79 when two sites were chosen for more intense analyses (one of
these, area L, was also among the original eight and thus was examined on both
trips. A new study site, the B-area, established in 1992 was the focus of a
study on fire succession (below). I returned to three of these sites several
more times during 1989-2008 (see below). Censuses of Australian lizards
collected at each of these study sites were compiled ([OZ
Censuses](node/16/298)).

Except for some type specimens lodged in the Western Australian Museum, all of
the 1966-68 specimens are lodged in the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural
History. Australian specimens collected since then are lodged in the Western
Australian Museum (negotiations are currently underway with WAM to deposit a
large synoptic collection in the Texas Memorial Natural History Museum here in
Austin, Texas).

Species codes and family identities for Australian lizards are here:

[Download csv file](TODO/OzSpecies.csv) ([Australian species
codes](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/OZ_Species.jpg)).

I continued to monitor the Australian saurofaunas at the L-area and Redsands
during 1989-1991 when I set up extensive pit trap lines. In 1992-94, dual
funding from NSF and NASA allowed me to undertake a detailed satellite imagery
remote sensing study of wildfires as agents of disturbance promoting habitat
diversity in the Great Victoria desert of Western Australia ([Haydon et al.
2000a](http://uts.cc.utexas.edu/~varanus/mosaics1.pdf),
[2000b](http://uts.cc.utexas.edu/~varanus/mosaics2.pdf)). An Australian field
assistant ran pit trap samples for 3 months during the Austral Spring of 1992.
A new study site, the B-area (Lat. 28° 13' 26.2"S, Long. 123° 35' 30.4"E), with
pit trap lines was set up in 1992 and monitored before a controlled burn -- it
was burned in October 1995 and monitored for 13 years following the fire during
1995, 1998, 2003 and 2008 to assess changes in community structure. [B-area
aerial photo showing locations of pit traps](TODO/B-area-Aerial-Overlay.png). Fire
is increasingly recognized as a major contributor to species density and
ecology, but what is the length of the recovery phase for desert lizard
communities? My long-term census data provide insights into how individual
species respond (species composition, relative abundance, dietary flexibility,
and reproductive tactics). A total of 2846 individual lizards representing some
46 species were collected at the B-area from 1992 through 2008 ([B-area
Censuses](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/B-area_Censuses.jpg)).

{% featured_img(path="B-areaDietsCorr.jpg", width=600) %}
Stomach contents of these lizards reflect how arthropod prey resources changed
during the fire succession cycle ([Pianka and Goodyear
2012](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/FireEcologyAustralEcology2012.pdf)).
{% end %}

I began studies at Red Sands in 1978-79 (_N = 1436_) under a Guggenheim
Fellowship, continued them during 1989-92 (_N = 3196_) with support from the
National Geographic Society and as a Fulbright Senior Research Fellow, and made
subsequent collections in 1995-96 (_N = 2353_), 1998 (_N = 1272_), 2003 (_N = 895_),
and 2008 (_N = 1075_). Similarly, I conducted censuses on the L-area in 1966-68
(_N = 532_), 1978-79 (_N = 1567_), and 1989-92 (_N = 1997_). These data were used to
study long-term changes ([Pianka
1996](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/THOC/Long-term.pdf)) such as those that
occur in response to fires and shrub encroachment due to increased
precipitation (global weather modification). Lizard abundance and species
richness both decreased from 1998 to 2008 as evidenced by sampling the exact
same pits during the same months 3 times in ten years ranging from
September-December 1998 to September-December 2003 and once again during
September-December 2008.

# Australian Data

For every lizard collected, the following information was collated in field
notebooks ([Link to pdfs of Field Notes](TODO/FieldNotes.html)): unique ID number,
genus, species, sex (if possible), date, time of collection, active body
temperature in oC, ambient air temperature at chest height in °C, where the
lizard was when first sighted, and where it ran to, fresh field measured
snout-vent length, fresh tail length and condition, and weight in grams. These
data files can be downloaded [here](TODO/OZ_download.html):

* [AllOZ](downloads/Data/AustraliaFiles/OZ-All.csv)
* [OZkey](downloads/Data/AustraliaFiles/OZkey.csv)
* [OZanat](downloads/Data/AustraliaFiles/OZanat.csv)
* [OZdiet](node/19/1144)
* [OZfemales](downloads/Data/AustraliaFiles/OZfemales.csv)
* [OZtestes](downloads/Data/AustraliaFiles/OZtestes.csv)

On sandridge sites, positions where each lizard was found were recorded (flat,
base, slope, or crest). For many thousands of lizards collected from 1992
through 2008, pit trap numbers were also recorded. High resolution color aerial
photos show precise locations of pit traps on three study sites ([B, L, and R
-- download here](Aerial_Photos)).

As in North America and the Kalahari, Australian lizards were dissected and sex
and reproductive condition ascertained. Stomachs were removed and stomach
contents identified into the same basic list of 20 different prey categories,
most insect orders, only 19 of which occurred in Australia (solpugids are
present in North America and the Kalahari, but absent in Australia). All snakes
were collected and bird lists were assembled for both the Kalahari and
Australian study sites ([Pianka and Pianka
1970](http://www.zo.utexas.edu/courses/bio373/Emu.1970.pdf)).

In 1978-79, a Guggenheim Fellowship allowed me to focus attention on two study
areas: the L-area (_N = 1567_ lizards) and Redsands (_N = 1436_ lizards), to better
characterize resource utilization by rare species. I hired a competent
entomologist Dr. Thomas D. Schultz to go through stomach contents of these
lizards identifying prey to the finest resolution possible. Ants and termites
were placed into size and/or color categories by family to generate some 97 ant
and 58 different termite resource states. Over 200 different prey categories
were recognized, not all of which were present at either site alone. These data
have been digitized but need to be linked to other files, cross checked against
original data sheets, and imported into mySQL tables.


# Global Climate Change

The Australian Bureau of Meteorology reports that long-term average annual
precipitation in the region of the Great Victoria Desert is less than 200 mm
(map shown below).

{{ center_img(path="Oz-LTM-Pptn.gif", width=600, class="") }}

Moreover, whereas average annual rainfall over the past decade has fallen in
eastern Australia and coastal areas, precipitation has increased in the
interior of Western Australia. During the last 40 years, rainfall in this part
of the GVD has increased by 20-30mm per decade above the long-term average
(Australian Bureau of Meteorology map of deviations in precipitation from 1970
to the present). This striking change in rainfall regime is indicative of
global climate change.

{% caption_img(path="1970-2014TrendMap.jpg", width=600, class="") %}
2014 Trend Map
{% end %}


In 2003, I was stunned that I did not recognize my long-term study areas and
actually drove right past them because shrubs had increased so greatly in
abundance! Spinifex, a vital microhabitat for many lizard species, has
diminished with the increased abundance of shrubs. As a result of this
increased rainfall, shrub encroachment seems to have changed these ecosystems
profoundly. The changing vegetation appears to have affected both avian and
lizard populations, and most likely has also impacted arthropod populations
upon which birds and lizards depend for food. Old photographs of study sites
will be compared with recent ones to document these changes in the vegetation.
Changes in the relative abundances of lizard species and in their diets over
this decade will constitute further evidence of global climate change as well
as reveal its impact on insect and lizard faunas.

Because lizards are sedentary terrestrial ectotherms, they are very sensitive
to temperature -- they respond rapidly to climatic change and can be used to
monitor global warming. A recent study suggests that behavioral
thermoregulation may enable ectotherms to adapt to global warming by shifting
their seasonal patterns of activity and reproduction ([Kearney et al.
2009](http://www.pnas.org/content/106/10/3835.full.pdf+html); [Huey and
Tewksbury 2009](http://www.pnas.org/content/106/10/3647.full)). My extensive
data on day and time of activity, microhabitat, ambient air temperatures and
active body temperatures for thousands of desert lizards (82 species) will
allow tests of the assumptions and predictions of their energy-mass balance
models. In addition, my long-term (1966-2008) data on reproduction in
Australian desert lizards will allow me to detect any such temporal shifts in
reproductive cycles over a 42-year time interval.

Climate change appears to have altered the fire regime in the GVD as well:
during the last two decades, fires have been more frequent and much more
extensive than they were during the 1970's to the 1990's ([Haydon et al.
2000a](http://uts.cc.utexas.edu/~varanus/mosaics1.pdf),
[2000b](http://uts.cc.utexas.edu/~varanus/mosaics2.pdf)). This new fire regime
may result in a more homogeneous landscape, which could reduce habitat
heterogeneity and species diversity, and might even lead to local extinctions.

## References

- Pianka, E.R. 1969. Habitat specificity, speciation, and species density in
Australian desert lizards. *Ecology* 50: 498-502. [Download pdf](../HabSpec.pdf).

- Pianka, E. R. 1973. The structure of lizard communities. *Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics* 4: 53-74. Selected as "This Week's Citation Classic"
in *Current Contents* (Agriculture, Biology & Environmental Sciences) (1988),
volume 19 (number 35): page 18. [Download
pdf](../ARES.pdf).

- Pianka, E. R. 1974. Niche overlap and diffuse competition. *Proc. Nat. Acad
Sci.* 71: 2141-2145. [Download
pdf](../POZS1974.pdf).

- Pianka, E. R. 1975. Niche relations of desert lizards. Chapter 12 (pp.
292-314) in M. Cody and J. Diamond (eds.) *Ecology and Evolution of
Communities.* Harvard University Press.

- Pianka, E. R. 1986. *Ecology and Natural History of Desert Lizards. Analyses
of the Ecological Niche and Community Structure.* Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey.

- Pianka, E. R. 1996. Long-term changes in Lizard Assemblages in the Great
Victoria Desert: Dynamic Habitat Mosaics in Response to Wildfires. Chapter 8
(pp. 191-215) in M. L. Cody and J. A. Smallwood (eds.) *Long-term studies of
vertebrate communities.* Academic Press. [Download pdf](../Long-term.pdf).

- Pianka, E. R. and S. E. Goodyear. 2012. Lizard responses to wildfire in arid
interior Australia: Long-term experimental data and commonalities with other
studies. *Austral Ecology* 37: 1-11. [Download
pdf](../FireEcologyAustralEcology2012.pdf).

- Pianka, E. R. and R. B. Huey. 1971. Bird species density in the Kalahari and
the Australian deserts. *Koedoe* 14: 123-130. [Download
pdf](../Koedoe.1971.pdf).

- Pianka, H. D. and E. R. Pianka. 1970. Bird censuses from desert localities in
Western Australia. *Emu* 70: 17-22. [Download pdf](../Emu.1970.pdf).
